# 0.13.* -> 0.14

This update contains a few _possible_ breaking changes, many new deprecations added and some old deprecations removed. 

## Breaking changes

### Personalization based on column priority, not order

Columns now contains priority - the higher priority, the earlier it will be rendered.
This is opposite of previous "order" logic, where first item had "0" order, second "1", third "2", etc.
If your application uses personalization persistence, make sure to clear its data, otherwise the order of the columns will be in reverse!  

### New column export views

The data table type classes now contain a new `buildExportView()` method.

The column type classes now contain new `buildExportHeaderView` and `buildExportValueView` methods.

These methods are meant to be _especially_ lightweight, and used exclusively for exporting.

This is a **breaking change** if your application uses custom export-specific logic
in **any** data table type `buildView()` method or **any** column type `buildHeaderView()` or `buildValueView()` methods!

### Column, filter and exporter builders

Internally, the columns, filters and exporters are now utilizing the builder pattern similar to data tables and actions.
If your application contains custom logic using internal bundle classes, you _may_ need to update it.

## New deprecations

### Deprecated filter form-related options

The form-related filter type options are now deprecated:

- `field_type` use `form_type` instead
- `field_options` use `form_options` instead
- `operator_type` use `operator_form_type` instead
- `operator_options` use `operator_form_options` instead

To select a default operator for the filter, instead of overwriting the `operator_options.choices` option,
use the new `default_operator` option.

To display operator selector to the user, instead of using the `operator_options.visible` option, 
use the new `operator_selectable` option.

To limit operator selection for the filter, instead of using the `operator_option.choices` option,
use the new `supported_operators` option.

### Deprecated built-in PhpSpreadsheet & OpenSpout integrations

The built-in integration with PhpSpreadsheet and OpenSpout is now deprecated.

The PhpSpreadsheet integration will not be officially supported (for now).

The OpenSpout integration is now extracted to a separate package - install [kreyu/data-table-open-spout-bundle](https://github.com/Kreyu/data-table-open-spout-bundle) instead.

### Deprecated builders name and options setter methods

The following builders now have `setName`, `setOptions` and `setOption` methods deprecated:

- `DataTableBuilderInterface`
- `ColumnBuilderInterface`
- `FilterBuilderInterface`
- `ActionBuilderInterface`
- `ExporterBuilderInterface`

If you need to change default name of the data table type, override its `getName()` method:

```php
use Kreyu\Bundle\DataTableBundle\Type\AbstractDataTableType;

class ProductDataTableType extends AbstractDataTableType
{
    public function getName(): string
    {
        return 'unique_products';
    }
}
```

If you need to change the name dynamically to display multiple data tables of the same type, 
use the factory `createNamed()` or `createNamedBuilder()` methods:

```php
use Kreyu\Bundle\DataTableBundle\DataTableFactoryAwareTrait;

class ProductController
{
    use DataTableFactoryAwareTrait;
    
    public function index(): string
    {
        $availableProducts = $this->createNamedDataTable('available_products', ProductDataTableType::class);
        $unavailableProducts = $this->createNamedDataTable('unavailable_products', ProductDataTableType::class);
        
        // ...
    }
}
```

Same logic applies to every other feature (columns, filters, actions and exporters), 
although only data table factory is commonly used in the applications.

### Deprecated default configuration extension

The `Kreyu\Bundle\DataTableBundle\Extension\Core\DefaultConfigurationDataTableTypeExtension` is now deprecated.
The default configuration is now applied by the base `Kreyu\Bundle\DataTableBundle\Type\DataTableType`.

This extension is no longer registered in the container, however, if your application
has it registered in the container (e.g. to change its priority), remove the definition.

### Deprecated data table persistence subject options

The following data table type options are deprecated:

- `filtration_persistence_subject`
- `sorting_persistence_subject`
- `pagination_persistence_subject`
- `personalization_persistence_subject`

Instead, use the subject provider (that will provide a persistence subject) options:

- `filtration_persistence_subject_provider`
- `sorting_persistence_subject_provider`
- `pagination_persistence_subject_provider`
- `personalization_persistence_subject_provider`

## Deprecated uppercase snake cased operator enum cases

The `Kreyu\Bundle\DataTableBundle\Filter\Operator` enum has changed its cases:

| Before                | After               |
|-----------------------|---------------------|
| `EQUALS`              | `Equals`            |
| `CONTAINS`            | `Contains`          |
| `NOT_CONTAINS`        | `NotContains`       |
| `NOT_EQUALS`          | `NotEquals`         |
| `GREATER_THAN`        | `GreaterThan`       |
| `GREATER_THAN_EQUALS` | `GreaterThanEquals` |
| `LESS_THAN_EQUALS`    | `LessThanEquals`    |
| `LESS_THAN`           | `LessThan`          |
| `START_WITH`          | `StartsWith`        |
| `END_WITH`            | `EndsWith`          |

Replace all occurrences of the old cases with the new ones.

**Note**: the previous cases are marked as deprecated, and internally are converted
to the new ones using the `getNonDeprecatedCase()` method to ease the transition process.

Additionally, the translation keys of operator cases have changed:

| Operator           | Translation key before | Translation key after    |
|--------------------|------------------------|--------------------------|
| `Equal`            | `EQUALS`               | `Equals`                 |
| `Contain`          | `CONTAINS`             | `Contains`               |
| `NotContain`       | `NOT_CONTAINS`         | `Not contains`           |
| `NotEqual`         | `NOT_EQUALS`           | `Not equals`             |
| `GreaterThan`      | `GREATER_THAN`         | `Greater than`           |
| `GreaterThanEqual` | `GREATER_THAN_EQUALS`  | `Greater than or equals` |
| `LessThanEqual`    | `LESS_THAN_EQUALS`     | `Less than or equals`    |
| `LessThan`         | `LESS_THAN`            | `Less than`              |
| `StartWith`        | `STARTS_WITH`          | `Starts with`            |
| `EndWith`          | `ENDS_WITH`            | `Ends with`              |

The translation change ensures that applications without translator component can use the translation key as fallback.

## Deprecated uppercase snake cased export strategy enum cases

The `Kreyu\Bundle\DataTableBundle\Exporter\ExportStrategy` enum has changed its cases:

| Before                 | After                |
|------------------------|----------------------|
| `INCLUDE_ALL`          | `IncludeAll`         |
| `INCLUDE_CURRENT_PAGE` | `IncludeCurrentPage` |

Replace all occurrences of the old cases with the new ones.

**Note**: the previous cases are marked as deprecated, and internally are converted
to the new ones using the `getNonDeprecatedCase()` method to ease the transition process.

Additionally, the translation keys of operator cases have changed:

| Strategy             | Translation key before | Translation key after  |
|----------------------|------------------------|------------------------|
| `IncludeAll`         | `INCLUDE_ALL`          | `Include all`          |
| `IncludeCurrentPage` | `INCLUDE_CURRENT_PAGE` | `Include current page` |

The translation change ensures that applications without translator component can use the translation key as fallback.

## Removed deprecations

### Removed deprecated `DataTableControllerTrait`

The previously deprecated `Kreyu\Bundle\DataTableBundle\DataTableControllerTrait` is now removed. 
Use `Kreyu\Bundle\DataTableBundle\DataTableFactoryAwareTrait` instead.

### Removed deprecated `themes` configuration node

The previously deprecated `themes` configuration node is now removed. 
Use `defaults.themes` instead.

```yaml
# config/packages/kreyu_data_table.yaml

# Before (now this throws an exception):
kreyu_data_table:
  themes:
    - '@KreyuDataTable/themes/tabler.html.twig'

# After (this is valid configuration):
kreyu_data_table:
  defaults:
    themes:
      - '@KreyuDataTable/themes/tabler.html.twig'
```